Bert pre-training and fine-tuning on GLUE (#24)
mosaicml/benchmarks: bert/README.md

* [Quality Not Quantity: On the Interaction between Dataset Design and Robustness of CLIP](https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05516)
* [Insights into Pre-training via Simpler Synthetic Tasks](https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.10139)
* [Pre-train or Annotate? Domain Adaptation with a Constrained Budget](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04711)
* [Foundation Models of Scientific Knowledge for Chemistry: Opportunities, Challenges and Lessons Learned](https://openreview.net/forum?id=SLX-I2MHUZ9)
* [Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural Language Processing](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779)
* [LinkBERT: Pretraining Language Models with Document Links](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15827)

One may wonder, why start with random initializations? Granted that it is better to train on domain-specific data, can't that happen as "domain adaptation" from a pretrained checkpoint? There are two reasons not to do this, one theoretical and one practical. The theory says that, because we are doing non-convex optimization, domain adaptation "may not be able to completely undo suboptimal initialization from the general-domain language model" [Gu et al., 2020](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779).

> The practical reason is that certain outcomes are only available if the model and tokenizer are pre-trained from scratch.

Reviewer: Good call

> The practical reason is that certain outcomes are only available if the model and tokenizer are pre-trained from scratch.

Author: I added some text for this. Please take a look and/or edit as you think best.

> The practical reason is that certain outcomes are only available if the model and tokenizer are pre-trained from scratch.

Reviewer 2: LGTM

So, for example, if you want to use ALiBi positional embeddings (and [you probably should](https://ofir.io/The-Use-Case-for-Relative-Position-Embeddings/), they seem to improve LM perplexity, downstream accuracy, and allow the model to generalize to longer sequences than seen at train time), you need to train from scratch (or fine-tune from a checkpoint which was pretrained with ALiBi positional embeddings, which we will be releasing!). Or if you want to use Gated Linear Units in place of regular feedforwards ([as recommended by Noam Shazeer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202), one of the authors of the original Transformers paper), again, you have to train with them from scratch.

Another good example is domain-specific tokenization. In the biomedical domain, words may be split by the pretrained BERT tokenizer in ways that make downstream tasks more difficult and computationally expensive. For example, the common drug "naloxone" in tokenized by `bert-base-uncased` tokenizer into the 4 tokens `([na, ##lo, ##xon, ##e]` [Gu et al., 2020](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779), making tasks like NER more difficult and using more of the limited sequence length available.

> ## Contents

Author: GLUE is now discussed throughout. Please let me know if you consider anything to still be missing.

> ## Contents

Reviewer 2: :+1: rereviewed the readme

# Welcome!

> This benchmark covers pre-training and fine-tuning a BERT model from scratch. With this starter code, you'll be able to do Masked Language Modeling (MLM) pre-training on the C4 dataset and classification fine-tuning on the 8 different GLUE benchmark tasks. We also provide the source code and recipe behind our Mosaic BERT model, which you can train yourself using this repo.

Reviewer 2: "8 different GLUE benchmark tasks", should probably note that we exclude WNLI

Author: Fixing this here by just removing detail (since it's an intro paragraph). The WNLI exclusion detail will be mentioned below.

## Contents

You'll find in this folder:

* This `README.md`
* `main.py` — A straightforward script for parsing YAMLs, building a [Composer](https://github.com/mosaicml/composer) Trainer, and kicking off an MLM pre-training training job, locally or on Mosaic's cloud
* `glue.py` - A more complex script for parsing YAMLs and orchestrating the numerous fine-tuning training jobs across the 8 GLUE tasks, locally or on Mosaic's cloud
* `convert_c4.py` — Code for creating a streaming C4 dataset, which can be used for pre-training. See [Dataset preparation](#Dataset-preparation)
* `src/data_c4.py` — A [MosaicML streaming dataset](https://docs.mosaicml.com/projects/streaming/en/latest/) that can be used with a vanilla PyTorch dataloader or [Composer](https://github.com/mosaicml/composer)

> * `src/hf_bert.py` — Code for creating a HuggingFace BERT model for MLM (pre-training) or classification (GLUE fine-tuning), wrapped in [`ComposerModel`](https://docs.mosaicml.com/en/v0.11.1/composer_model.html), for compatibility with the [Composer Trainer](https://docs.mosaicml.com/en/v0.11.1/api_reference/generated/composer.Trainer.html#composer.Trainer)

Reviewer 2: Should this link to HuggingFaceModel instead of ComposerModel? The wrapper is technically a HuggingFaceModel (which is a ComposerModel).

* `src/mosaic_bert.py` — Code for creating a Mosaic BERT model for MLM (pre-training) or classification (GLUE fine-tuning), wrapped in [`ComposerModel`](https://docs.mosaicml.com/en/v0.11.1/composer_model.html), for compatibility with the [Composer Trainer](https://docs.mosaicml.com/en/v0.11.1/api_reference/generated/composer.Trainer.html#composer.Trainer)
* `src/bert_padding.py` — Source code for Mosaic BERT that supports reshaping tensors in order avoid inefficiencies due to padding

> * `src/bert_layers.py` — Source code for Mosaic BERT that re-implements BERT layers with our custom speed up methods built it, with an eye towards HuggingFace API compatibility

Reviewer 2: "built it" -> "built into it"

Author: Oops. Was supposed to be "built in".

Our streaming dataloader always streams from `data_remote` -> `data_local`, and if both paths are the same,
then no extra copying is done.

**Also remember** that if you only downloaded the `val` split, you need to make sure your train_dataloader is pointed at that split.
Just change `split: train` to `split: val` in your YAML.
This is already done in the testing YAML `yamls/test-cpu/main.py`, which you can also use to test your configuration.

## MLM pre-training

We run the `main.py` script using our `composer` launcher, which generates N processes (1 process per GPU device).

If training on a single node, the `composer` launcher will autodetect the number of devices, so all you need to do to pre-train a Mosaic BERT is run:

```bash
composer main.py yamls/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml
```

**Note:** The `yamls/*.yaml` files are intended to be used with `main.py`.

**Please remember** to modify the reference YAMLs (e.g., `yamls/mosiac-bert-base-uncased.yaml`) to customize saving and loading locations -- only the YAMLs in `yamls/test-cpu/` are ready to use out-of-the-box.

## GLUE fine-tuning

> The GLUE benchmark measures the average performance across 8 NLP classification tasks. This performance is typically used to evaluate the quality of the pre-training: once you have a set of weights from your MLM task, you fine-tune those weights separately for each task and average the results, with higher averages indicating higher pre-training quality.

Reviewer 2: again, mention excluding WNLI

> To handle this complicated fine-tuning pipeline, we provide the `glue.py` script, which supports parallelizing each of these fine-tuning jobs across all the GPUs on your node.

Reviewer 2: suggest adding: `Note: because of the small dataset/batch size of the GLUE tasks, this script parallelizes tasks across individual GPUs, rather than parallelizing each task across multiple GPUs` or something like that.

Once you have modified the YAMLs in `yamls/glue/` to reference your pre-trained checkpoint as the GLUE starting point, run the `glue.py` script using the standard `python` launcher (we don't use the `composer` launcher here because `glue.py` does its own multi-process orchestration):

```bash

> composer glue.py yamls/glue/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml

Reviewer 2: should be `python glue.py`

```

> Aggregate GLUE scores will be printed out at the end of the script and can also be tracked using Weights and Biases, if enabled via the YAML.

Reviewer 2: suggest "using Weights and Biases" -> "using Weights and Biases (any of the other (composer supported loggers)[https://docs.mosaicml.com/en/latest/trainer/logging.html#available-loggers] can be added easily as well)"

Another good example is domain-specific tokenization. In the biomedical domain, words may be split by the pre-trained BERT tokenizer in ways that make downstream tasks more difficult and computationally expensive. For example, the common drug "naloxone" in tokenized by `bert-base-uncased` tokenizer into the 4 tokens `[na, ##lo, ##xon, ##e]` [(Gu et al., 2020)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779), making tasks like NER more difficult and using more of the limited sequence length available.

Now that we've convinced you that you should train a Mosaic BERT from scratch, let's get into the how :) 

# Setup

> Here's what you need to get started with our BERT implementation:

Reviewer 3: It takes several screens of scrolling to get to this. Can we start the readme with:

- A couple intro sentences
- Installation / dependencies
- Quick start (a command or two that should "just work," even if only on synthetic data or something)

Want to minimize the barrier to getting started and deliver value to users ASAP.

* Use a Docker image with PyTorch 1.12+, e.g. [MosaicML's PyTorch base image](https://hub.docker.com/r/mosaicml/pytorch/tags)
  * Recommended tag: `mosaicml/pytorch:1.12.1_cu116-python3.9-ubuntu20.04`
  * This image comes pre-configured with the following dependencies:
    * PyTorch Version: 1.12.1
    * CUDA Version: 11.6
    * Python Version: 3.9

>     * Ubuntu Version: 20.04

Reviewer 3: Can we turn this into just `docker pull mosaicml/pytorch:1.12.1_cu116-python3.9-ubuntu20.04` + a link to more info about what's in this image if you're curious (maybe at the bottom of this readme, but ideally shared with other benchmarks since they all have this).

Trying to get this section down to a few lines the user can copy-paste to get started. Something like:

```
git clone https://github.com/mosaicml/benchmarks.git
cd bert
docker pull mosaicml/pytorch:1.12.1_cu116-python3.9-ubuntu20.04
...
```

Alternatively, we could have something like this in a Quickstart section at the top and this could be the more detailed version we link to.

* Use a system with NVIDIA GPU(s)

* Install requirements via: `pip install -r requirements.txt`

* Prepare a local copy of the C4 dataset via instructions below.

## Dataset preparation

To run pre-training, you'll need to make yourself a local copy of the C4 pre-training dataset.

> If you only want to profile these BERTs, we recommend that you **only download and prepare the `val` split**,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you only want to profile the speed of these BERTs, we recommend that you **only download and prepare the `val` split**,
```
Not confident that people with zero perf background will get that "profile" always refers to timing, as opposed to just being a synonym for "characterize" or "analyze".

Reviewer 3: Also, is this a common enough case to merit the space it takes to mention it?

and use it for both train and eval in your script. Just change `split: train` to `split: val` in your run YAML.
Alternatively, feel free to substitute our dataloader with one of your own in the script [main.py](./main.py#L101)!

> In this benchmark, we train BERTs on the [C4: Colossal, Cleaned, Common Crawl dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/c4).

Reviewer 3: should define C4 the first time we use it, not here

We first convert the dataset from its native format (a collection of zipped JSONs)
to MosaicML's streaming dataset format (a collection of binary `.mds` files).
Once in `.mds` format, we can store the dataset in a central location (filesystem, S3, GCS, etc.)

> and stream the data to any compute cluster, with any number of devices, and any number of CPU workers, and it all ~ just works ~ .

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and stream the data to any compute cluster, with any number of devices, and any number of CPU workers, and it all ~just works~ .
```
Assuming the lack of whitespace doesn't mess with the markdown. Otherwise just rm the tildes.

```bash
python glue.py yamls/glue/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml
```

Aggregate GLUE scores will be printed out at the end of the script and can also be tracked using Weights and Biases, if enabled via the YAML.
Any of the other [composer supported loggers](https://docs.mosaicml.com/en/latest/trainer/logging.html#available-loggers) can be added easily as well!

**Note:** The `yamls/glue/*.yaml` files are intended to be used with `glue.py`.

**Please remember** to modify the reference YAMLs (e.g., `yamls/glue/mosiac-bert-base-uncased.yaml`) to customize saving and loading locations -- only the YAMLs in `yamls/test-cpu/` are ready to use out-of-the-box.

### Running on the MosaicML Cloud

If you have configured a compute cluster to work with the MosaicML Cloud, you can use the `mcloud_run.yaml` reference YAMLs for examples of how to run pre-training and fine-tuning remotely!

Once you have filled in the missing YAML fields (and made any other modifications you want), you can launch pre-training by simply running:

```bash
mcli run -f yamls/mcloud_run.yaml
```

> Similarly, for GLUE fine-tuning just fill in the missing YAML fields (e.g., to use the pre-training checkpoint as the starting point) and run:

Reviewer 3: Also, can we enumerate which fields are missing + split this into multiple sentences?

```suggestion
Similarly, for GLUE fine-tuning, just fill in the missing YAML fields (e.g., to use the pre-training checkpoint as the starting point) and run:
```

```bash
mcli run -f yamls/glue/mcloud_run.yaml
```

## Multi-node training

To train with high performance on *multi-node* clusters, the easiest way is with MosaicML Cloud ;)

But if you want to try this manually on your own cluster, then just provide a few variables to `composer`, either directly via CLI or via environment variables. Then launch the appropriate command on each node.

> **Note:** multi-node training will only work `main.py` (the `glue.py` script handles its own orchestration across devices and is not built to be used with the `composer` launcher).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note:** multi-node training will only work with `main.py`; the `glue.py` script handles its own orchestration across devices and is not built to be used with the `composer` launcher.
```

# Using 2 nodes with 8 devices each
# Total world size is 16
# IP Address for Node 0 = [0.0.0.0]

# Node 0
composer --world_size 16 --node_rank 0 --master_addr 0.0.0.0 --master_port 7501 main.py yamls/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml

# Node 1
composer --world_size 16 --node_rank 1 --master_addr 0.0.0.0 --master_port 7501 main.py yamls/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml

```

### Multi-Node via environment variables

```bash
# Using 2 nodes with 8 devices each
# Total world size is 16
# IP Address for Node 0 = [0.0.0.0]

# Node 0
# export WORLD_SIZE=16
# export NODE_RANK=0
# export MASTER_ADDR=0.0.0.0
# export MASTER_PORT=7501
composer main.py yamls/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml

# Node 1
# export WORLD_SIZE=16
# export NODE_RANK=1
# export MASTER_ADDR=0.0.0.0
# export MASTER_PORT=7501
composer main.py yamls/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml
```

You should see logs being printed to your terminal.
You can also easily enable other experiment trackers like Weights and Biases or CometML by using [Composer's logging integrations](https://docs.mosaicml.com/en/v0.11.1/trainer/logging.html).

# Contact Us

If you run into any problems with the code, please file Github issues directly to this repo.

> If you want train BERT-style models on MosaicML Cloud, reach out to us at [demo@mosaicml.com](mailto:demo@mosaicml.com)!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to train BERT-style models on MosaicML Cloud, reach out to us at [demo@mosaicml.com](mailto:demo@mosaicml.com)!
```

Now that you've installed dependencies and built a local copy of the C4 dataset, let's start training! We'll start with MLM pre-training on C4.

**Note:** the YAMLs default to using `./my-copy-c4` as the location of your C4 dataset, following the above examples. **Please remember** to edit the `data_remote` and `data_local` paths in your pre-training YAMLs to reflect any differences in where your dataset lives (e.g., if you used a different folder name or already moved your copy to S3).

**Also remember** that if you only downloaded the `val` split, you need to make sure your train_dataloader is pointed at that split.
Just change `split: train` to `split: val` in your YAML.
This is already done in the testing YAML `yamls/test/main.py`, which you can also use to test your configuration (see [Quick Start](#quick-start)).

## MLM pre-training

> To get the most out of your pre-training budget, we recommend using **Mosiac BERT**! You can read more [below](#mosaic-bert).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To get the most out of your pre-training budget, we recommend using **Mosaic BERT**! You can read more [below](#mosaic-bert).
```

We run the `main.py` pre-training script using our `composer` launcher, which generates N processes (1 process per GPU device).
If training on a single node, the `composer` launcher will autodetect the number of devices.

```bash
# This will pre-train a HuggingFace BERT that reaches a downstream GLUE accuracy of about 83.3%.
# It takes about 11.5 hours on a single node with 8 A100_80g GPUs.
composer main.py yamls/main/hf-bert-base-uncased.yaml

# This will pre-train a Mosaic BERT that reaches the same downstream accuracy in roughly 1/3 the time.
composer main.py yamls/main/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml
```

> **Please remember** to modify the reference YAMLs (e.g., `yamls/main/mosiac-bert-base-uncased.yaml`) to customize saving and loading locations—-only the YAMLs in `yamls/test/` are ready to use out-of-the-box. See the [configs](#configs) section for more detail.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Please remember** to modify the reference YAMLs (e.g., `yamls/main/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml`) to customize saving and loading locations—only the YAMLs in `yamls/test/` are ready to use out-of-the-box. See the [configs](#configs) section for more detail.
```
The first dash is already an em dash; having both looks weird in the rendered readme

python glue.py yamls/glue/hf-bert-base-uncased.yaml

# This will run GLUE fine-tuning evaluation on your Mosaic BERT
python glue.py yamls/glue/mosaic-bert-base-uncased.yaml
```

Aggregate GLUE scores will be printed out at the end of the script and can also be tracked using Weights and Biases, if enabled via the YAML.
Any of the other [composer supported loggers](https://docs.mosaicml.com/en/latest/trainer/logging.html#available-loggers) can be added easily as well!

# Configs

This section is to help orient you to the config YAMLs referenced throughout this README and found in `yamls/`.

A quick note on our use of YAMLs:
* We use YAMLs just to make all the configuration explicit.
* You can also configure anything you want directly in the Python files.
* The YAML files don't use any special schema, keywords, or other magic. They're just a clean way of writing a dict for the scripts to read.

In other words, you're free to modify this starter code to suit your project and aren't tied to using YAMLs in your workflow.

## main.py

Before using the configs in `yamls/main/` when running `main.py`, you'll need to fill in:

> * `save_folder` - This will determine where model checkpoints are saved. Note that it can depend on `run_name`, so you should avoid re-using the same run name across multiple training runs.

Reviewer 3: How can it depend on run name? Is there an example that users can paste in?

There is mounting evidence that pre-training on domain specific data improves downstream evaluation accuracy:

* [Downstream Datasets Make Surprisingly Good Pretraining Corpora](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14389)
* [Quality Not Quantity: On the Interaction between Dataset Design and Robustness of CLIP](https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05516)
* [Insights into Pre-training via Simpler Synthetic Tasks](https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.10139)
* [Pre-train or Annotate? Domain Adaptation with a Constrained Budget](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04711)
* [Foundation Models of Scientific Knowledge for Chemistry: Opportunities, Challenges and Lessons Learned](https://openreview.net/forum?id=SLX-I2MHUZ9)
* [Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural Language Processing](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779)
* [LinkBERT: Pretraining Language Models with Document Links](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15827)

> In addition to being able to take advantage of pre-training on in-domain data, training from scratch means that you control the data start to finish. Publicly available pre-training corpuses cannot be used in many commercial cases due to legal considerations. Our starter code can easily be modified to handle custom datasets beyond the C4 example we provide.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to being able to take advantage of pre-training on in-domain data, training from scratch means that you control the data start to finish. Publicly available pre-training corpora cannot be used in many commercial cases due to legal considerations. Our starter code can easily be modified to handle custom datasets beyond the C4 example we provide.
```

> One may wonder, why start from scratch when public data isn't a concern? Granted that it is better to train on domain-specific data, can't that happen as "domain adaptation" from a pre-trained checkpoint? There are two reasons not to do this, one theoretical and one practical. The theory says that, because we are doing non-convex optimization, domain adaptation "may not be able to completely undo suboptimal initialization from the general-domain language model" [(Gu et al., 2020)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One may wonder, why start from scratch when public data *isn't* a concern? Granted that it is better to train on domain-specific data, can't that happen as "domain adaptation" from a pre-trained checkpoint? There are two reasons not to do this, one theoretical and one practical. The theory says that, because we are doing non-convex optimization, domain adaptation "may not be able to completely undo suboptimal initialization from the general-domain language model" [(Gu et al., 2020)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779).
```

> The practical reason is that certain outcomes are only available if the model and tokenizer are pre-trained from scratch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The practical reason to train from scratch is that it allows you to modify your model or tokenizer.
```

> So, for example, if you want to use ALiBi positional embeddings (and [you probably should](https://ofir.io/The-Use-Case-for-Relative-Position-Embeddings/), they seem to improve LM perplexity, downstream accuracy, and allow the model to generalize to longer sequences than seen at train time), you need to train from scratch (or fine-tune from a checkpoint which was pre-trained with ALiBi positional embeddings, which we will be releasing!). Or if you want to use Gated Linear Units in your feedforward layers ([as recommended by Noam Shazeer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202), one of the authors of the original Transformers paper), again, you have to train with them from scratch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, for example, if you want to use ALiBi positional embeddings (and [you probably should](https://ofir.io/The-Use-Case-for-Relative-Position-Embeddings/) since they improve LM perplexity, downstream accuracy, and generalization across sequences lengths), you need to train from scratch (or fine-tune from a checkpoint which was pre-trained with ALiBi positional embeddings, which we will be releasing!). Or if you want to use Gated Linear Units in your feedforward layers ([as recommended by Noam Shazeer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202), one of the authors of the original Transformers paper), again, you have to train with them from scratch.
```

> Another good example is domain-specific tokenization. In the biomedical domain, words may be split by the pre-trained BERT tokenizer in ways that make downstream tasks more difficult and computationally expensive. For example, the common drug "naloxone" in tokenized by `bert-base-uncased` tokenizer into the 4 tokens `[na, ##lo, ##xon, ##e]` [(Gu et al., 2020)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779), making tasks like NER more difficult and using more of the limited sequence length available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another good example is domain-specific tokenization. In the biomedical domain, words may be split by the pre-trained BERT tokenizer in ways that make downstream tasks more difficult and computationally expensive. For example, the common drug "naloxone" is tokenized by `bert-base-uncased` tokenizer into the 4 tokens `[na, ##lo, ##xon, ##e]` [(Gu et al., 2020)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15779), making tasks like NER more difficult and using more of the limited sequence length available.
```
